/******************************************************************************/
/*                                                                            */
/* Goudie - The Human Impact on the Natural Environment                       */
/* The Human Impact on Vegetation - Chapter 2 [SUMMARY]                       */
/*                                                                            */
/* Bruno Gonzalez Soria          (A01169284)                                  */
/* Antonio Osamu Katagiri Tanaka (A01212611)                                  */
/* Carlos Cardoso Isidoro        (A01750267)                                  */
/*                                                                            */
/* Campus EdMex [CEM]                                                         */
/*                                                                            */
/******************************************************************************/

/* - 2 THE HUMAN IMPACT ON VEGETATION --------------------------------------- */


/* : [Fires] - pp.23â€“29. :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: */
Chapter 2 discusses the problems with degraded (sub natural) and ruderal
(semi-natural) habitats due to human processes, such as fire, grazing and
physical methods for forest removal. Human civilizations have used fire for
several purposes, such as: a) forest clearance for agricultural needs, b)
grazing for animal domestication processes, c) drive away pests, d) cooking and
lightning, and e) signalling; besides other reasons.
    One of the most useful implementations of fire regarding agricultural
processes. The burned land is temporarily rich in nutrients, whereas frequent
land cultivation results in rapid deterioration in fertility. Land burning is
beneficial for agriculture, however (for instance) forest coverage was been
reduced from 79% to 53% in central and eastern New Zealand. The reduction of
tall trees and the expansion of sub natural areas were followed by the
introduction of fire.
    Is imperative that the use of fire by humans has a significant impact on the
environment. However, some natural fires may be caused by natural processes.
(e.g. heavy dense vegetation, lightning, or sparks produced by falling boulders)
The effects of fire depend on the fire size, intensity and duration. Some fires
are quick and cool (grassland fires) that only destroy ground vegetation, on the
other hand crown fires (forest fires) affect entire forests with high
temperatures.
    Humans do not only affect the environment by creating fires, but also by
fire suppression. fire suppression policies have undesirable consequences. One
of the best ways to prevent large fires is to allow the small fires to burn. In
some locations, fire protection services have an impact on the environment, as
the vegetation has become denser, the amount of combustible fuels has increased,
more amount of fire-intolerant species has risen, and vegetation diversity has
decreased. In other words, the intention to protect and preserve the forest led
to the generation of abnormal amounts of combustible fuel in form of
fire-intolerant vegetation.
    Natural fires are a good thing to the environment. Fire can sometimes
trigger the release of seeds, control insects, parasites and fungi, and mineral
elements are released.


/* : [Grazing & Domestic Stocks] - pp.30-32. :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: */
Light grazing may increase the productivity of wild pastures and the land tend
to b rich in nitrogen. However, heavy grazing is (in some cases) detrimental, as
it kills plants by reducing their level of photosynthesis. Excessive grazing can
lead to shrub dominance and to the alteration of native habitats, as they seem
to lack control predators and pathogens. Trees bring up nutrients from the soil
and keep them in circulation; grazing "means the export of calcium phosphate and
nitrogenous organic matter." (Goudie, 2011)
    On the other hand (as Goudie cites) mineral inputs from precipitation are
greater than the nutrients losses due to grazing. The concern is the deliberate
forest removal for pastures and agriculture, as this is the most significant way
in which humans have modified the environment.


/* : [Deforestation] - pp.32-39. :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: */
In most cases, forests are cleared to provide fuel and allow agriculture and
mining. However, some environmental consequences are inevitable, such as
flooding, sedimentation and accelerated land sliding. The current rates of
deforestation are not very well estimated, since some issues arise while
measuring and defining loss of forest area. Forests provide potential foods,
drinks, medicine, gums, resins, besides other things. Their removal may fuel
major environmental concerns as climate change and loss of biodiversity.
Deforestation causes regional and local issues.
    To prevent further forest loss, some communities have developed a
sustainable form of agriculture known as swidden (shifting agriculture). Swidden
has common properties with rain forests, as swidden: a) do not plant food plants
in an open field, b) it involves a wide range of species having a high diversity
index, c) it has high quantities of nutrients locked up within the flora,
instead of within the soil. However, swidden fails with population increase as
the rain forest cannot recuperate from long periods of "high demand".
    Deforestation is ot an unstoppable or irreversible process. Strategies need
to be developed to reduce the rate at which forests are disappearing, such as:
research, education, conservation, restoration, sustainable development, and
reducing demand.
    When a forest starts to regenerate (secondary forest) the type of forest is
different from the first one. Secondary forests are lower with trees with
smaller average dimensions and uniform in structure and poorer in species. On
the other hand, most trees within secondary forests are light-demanding and
intolerant of shade. However, secondary forests are better than no-forest; they
are effective at preventing soil erosion and maintaining water quality. They
also provide shelter to some flora and fauna.


/* : [Desertification] - pp.42-48. :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: */
The term of desertification simply refers to the development of desertic
landscapes in areas that were once green. Their is already evidence that
sustains that desert spreading is related to human routes and settlements.
Woodcutting is the leading cause of desertification. Desertization is mostly
irreversible. There are some special cases, where ecological conditions are
favorable, it is possible to observe vegetation recovery once excess pressures
are eliminated. The process of desertification depends in a variety of factors,
but many theories sustain that deserts themselves are created by human activity.
Drought is also an important factor to consider for desertification, but even
this events have foung a relationship with human activity.


/* : [Savannas and Mid-latitude Grasslands] - pp.39-42,48-53. ::::::::::::::: */
Natural occurring savannas are an important part of the ecosystem, and there is
proof that human invasion changes their characterisics. This ecosystem is
mainly, or even entirely, composed by grasses and sedges. They cover an area of
18 million km2. The element that seems to maintain them in this state is
intentional or inadvertent burning. Nevertheless their origin is consequence of
a multifactorial combination of soil, climate, geomorphology, hydrology, etc.
    Some species of trees have evolved to survive repeated burning. The
inability of grass cover to maintain itself due to long periods of heavy
grazing, this in return reduces the frequency of fires which used to maintain
the savanna. As a result, tree and bush invasion take place. Although it seems
like a positive outcome, the grasses are no longer able to adequatly hold of
cover the soil, resulting in runoff and erosion. There are plenty of examples
for the formation of grasslands in different parts of the world due to human
intervention. The maquis have become an invader in the Mediterranean lands
representing a degeneration of the forests. In North America the prairies are a
serious problem which, as with savanna, are probably created and maintained by
fires. The Pampa in Argentina, is another example of extended grasslands that
may have been consequence of pre-Spanish aboriginal hunting and pastoral
population. Europe is no exception with the formation of heathlands.
    Nevertheless, natuarl oaccuring grasslands are also home for numerous
species. The continuos human activity on the areas has already reduced about 20%
from their preagricutltural extent.


/* : [Ecological Explosions] - pp.53-56. :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: */
Introduction and spreading of plants and other organisms is in part due to the
human action. Plants are introduced for many reasons such as crops, ornamental
and miscellaneous landscapes modifiers. One of the most important issues about
plants spreading by humans (whether deliberately or accidentally) is the fact
that some kind of domesticated plants have lost their capability to reproduces
by themselves. So even though some sort of plants have learnt to adaptate to new
ecosystems and to grow in their no native lands, there are some important
problems to watch out, because it can imply serious ecological consequences.
For instance, the introduction of new species to ecosystems can cause the death
of some other species in that ecosystem.
    The introduction of new animals also has a bad impact on plant species.
Chapter 2 shows some cases where the introduction of animals to some lands has
fallen plant species. In general, invasive species may be one of the principal
biodiversity loss causes due to their rol in competition, predation and
hybridization.
    Some other examples of ecological explosions due to human action by creating
new habitats are those associated with the creation of artificial lakes or the
spreading of seed along the roads. Roadsides are characterized by numerous
ecological modification including: treading, soil compaction, confined drainage,
increased runoff, removal of organic matter and sometimes additions of litter or
waste material of frequently high nitrogen content among others.


/* : [Pollution] - pp.56-59. :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: */
Some of the air pollution released by humans affect plants. Gaseous pollutants
are divided into primary and secondary forms, being the primary those directly
emitted into the air from while the secondaries are a consequence of chemical
processes in the atmosphere. Sulfur dioxide seems to be the main cause of this
detriment to plants.
    Lichens sensitivity have made them to be rare in some areas of the city
where the pollution is high. Indeed, it has been shown (Gilbert, 1970) that if a
lichen is transplanted from the country to the city, eventually it dies. But
sulfur dioxide is not necessarily always the cause of impoverishment, there are
so many factors, for instance fluoride or photochemical smog, which is also
known to have adverse effects on plants both within cities and on their
outskirts.
    Vegetation will always be affected by air pollution, even though the adverse
effects of pollution in plants are not only restricted to air pollution, but
also water and soil pollution due to the excessive amounts of heavy metals on
them which are toxic to plants.


/* : [Plant Decline] - pp.59-64. :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: */
Talking about forest decline is the same as forest death, which has been an
environmental issue treated since 1980s and can be identified symptoms for this
phenomenon divided into three groups (World Resources Institute, 1986, 
table 12.9): growth-decreasing, abnormal growth and water-stress. Most cases of
forest decline are the result of the cumulative effects of a number of stresses,
such as predisposing, inciting, and contributing stresses (Innes, 1987): p
redisposing stresses are those that operate over long time scales, such as
climatic change and changes in soil properties. Inciting stresses are those such
as drought, frost and short-term pollution episodes, that operate over short
time scales. Contributing stresses appear in weakened plants and are frequently
classed as secondary factors.
    There are many records of plant species that are being affected by human
actions in addition to deforestation, grazing, fire and pollution. For instance,
there are some records of plant collectors that have caused the eradication of
rare plants in an are because they want to seek rare, local and unusual species.
Even agriculture has an important role in habitat disappearing when trying to
make improvements. The introduction of pests, either deliberately or
accidentally, can also lead to a decrease in the range and numbers of
aparticular species.
    But the human impact on plants could be not always negative. It is likely
that in some ecosystems humans encourage a high diversity of plant growth by
acting as a â€˜keystone predatorâ€™, a species which prevents competitive exclusion
by a few dominant species.
    There is a new technique in genetic engineering field that involves
manipulation of DNA, which allows to modify some kind of species by taking some
genes from one specie to another specie.  For example, a bacterial gene can be
inserted into maize to give it resistance to certain insect pests. It has also
been feared that genetic modification could make a plant more invasive, leading
to a new threat from superweeds


/* - REFERENCES ------------------------------------------------------------- */

Goudie, A. (2011). The Human Impact on the Natual Environment. (Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Ed.) (sixth). Hong Kong: Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

/******************************************************************************/